Document grouped results layout and CATEGORIZE patterns in Discover ES|QL (#6190)
elastic/docs-content: explore-analyze/discover/run-pattern-analysis-discover.md

Pattern analysis in **Discover** helps you find patterns in unstructured log messages by performing categorization analysis on text fields. It creates categories based on message structures, displays their distribution in a chart, and provides example documents for each pattern. This makes it easier to identify common log patterns, filter out noise, and focus on anomalous messages during troubleshooting.

:::{tip}
:applies_to: { stack: preview 9.4, serverless: preview }

> You can also detect patterns from {{esql}} using the [`CATEGORIZE`](elasticsearch://reference/query-languages/esql/functions-operators/grouping-functions/categorize.md) grouping function. Discover renders the results as expandable groups with row actions. See [](/explore-analyze/discover/try-esql.md#esql-cascade-layout).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can also detect patterns from {{esql}} using the [`CATEGORIZE`](elasticsearch://reference/query-languages/esql/functions-operators/grouping-functions/categorize.md) grouping function. Discover renders the results as expandable groups with row actions. Refer to [](/explore-analyze/discover/try-esql.md#esql-cascade-layout).
```
